North Korea's nuclear weapons program has moved back to the front pages with the unprecedented acknowledgement by North Korea during talks this week in Beijing that the North has developed nuclear weapons. News of this revelation came as Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs James A. Kelly was preparing to leave Beijing for consultations in Seoul, and leaves the future of the talks uncertain and the threat of a potential escalation in tensions on the peninsula high. This is but the latest step in a simmering crisis that began with the admission by North Korea, after being confronted with hard evidence by Assistant Secretary Kelly in October 2002, that it has been pursuing in secret a nuclear weapons program in violation of the Agreed Framework of 1994 and its adherence to the Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT). Pyongyang's subsequent actions in asserting the right to possess nuclear weapons, breaking the seals on its nuclear reactor put there by the International Atomic Energy Agency, withdrawing from the NPT and the expulsion of IAEA inspectors from the Yongbyon nuclear facilities, have kept the crisis simmering, and laid the basis for reported splits within the Bush administration over the best strategy for dealing with Pyongyang. Seemingly replaying debates marking the lead-up to the war with Iraq, newspaper analyses portray the State Department under Secretary of State Colin Powell pressing for diplomacy and efforts to reassure the North Koreans that the U.S. was not seeking regime change, while Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld has reportedly called for joining with Beijing to push for removal of the North Korean regime. (Note 1)

For the moment, diplomacy seems to have the upper hand, with a focus on Washington and Pyongyang first trying to feel out the other's positions in the Beijing talks. Incipient brinksmanship combined with uncertainties about what the North has done, much less intends to do, has so far marked the DPRK's actions, as seen in reports that Pyongyang had encountered problems in restarting its nuclear reprocessing facility, and the confusion over the correct English translation of a statement on the North Korean official website, which the North Koreans originally translated to announce the successful reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel rods, only to be revised a day later to say the country was "successfully going forward to reprocess work." (Note 2)

To contribute to public understanding about this potential crisis and its historical roots, The National Security Archive is releasing the first in a planned series of Electronic Briefing Books on U.S. policies toward the Korean Peninsula. The subject of this first briefing book is U.S. intelligence and policy regarding North Korea's nuclear weapons program. Compared to what is available on Iraq and other suspected proliferating governments, there is a serious lack of declassified documents on this issue that can help the public and scholars understand and analyze the historical development of U.S. policies on the North Korean nuclear program, though there is a wealth of public data available on the Internet (see below for a selective list of these sites). The documents described below are a selection of both declassified and publicly released intelligence assessments, policy statements and reports on the North Korean nuclear program. Other documents provide a fascinating window on the policies pursued by the Reagan and first Bush administrations in addressing this issue, and the way in which both diplomatic and ideological crosscurrents have complicated or hampered U.S. efforts.


The U.S. Intelligence Reports

The declassified intelligence documents show the evolution of intelligence concern about the North Korean nuclear program. Initial identification of the program by the CIA in the early 1980s was not immediately followed by concern that North Korea was seeking to develop nuclear weapons (see "A Ten-Year Projection …"). By the mid-1980s, CIA analysis discussed not only the components of the nuclear program, but the potential that North Korea would, indeed, seek to develop nuclear weapons. However, the CIA did note the energy-production rationale for the program and the lack of evidence that the North was actually planning to joint the nuclear club. The concerns raised by this intelligence prompted U.S. efforts to secure cooperation from Moscow and Beijing, as well as Western supplier nations, in refusing to provide North Korea with materials needed for its nuclear program (see the ca. January 5, 1985 Department of State Briefing Paper). By the very late 1980s, however, the rapid expansion of the North Korean program was the subject of several analyses. These intelligence assessments should be viewed along with those available on a number of the websites cited below which provide testimony by various Directors of Central Intelligence on the North Korean nuclear threat. These analyses must also be read with an understanding of the uncertainties and ambiguities that surround any effort to assess the capabilities and intentions of such a secretive regime as North Korea's. (Note 3)

Diplomatic Controversy and the Chinese Role

Other documents shed light on the internal policy deliberations and debates that have marked prior administrations' efforts to address the threat posed by the North Korean nuclear program. An excerpt from an interview with Charles W. Freeman, a long-time State Department China hand who was deputy chief of mission at the U.S. Embassy in Beijing during the Reagan years, centers on Freeman's recollections about a still-born step toward opening direct talks with North Korea that might have emerged from a surprising Chinese offer during the first Reagan administration to broker such discussions. This initiative was effectively killed, according to Freeman, by the determined opposition of Paul Wolfowitz, who was then Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs. Freeman speculates that Wolfowitz's hostility to the initiative was rooted in part in the latter's ideological suspicion of any Chinese initiative and his concerns over adverse reactions from the Republican right-wing to such talks (see pp. 430-431 of the excerpt). Wolfowitz's reputed role as the intellectual driving-force behind the hard-line positions taken by the Defense Department on Iraq, North Korea and other members of the "Axis of Evil" suggests that long-standing debates continue to be waged in the current administration.

Two documents provide insight into how the first Bush administration faced the North Korean nuclear issue, suggesting that more collegiality marked relations between Foggy Bottom and the Pentagon at that time than now. A briefing paper for Under Secretary of State Reginald Bartholomew's trip to Beijing in the summer of 1991 outlines the concerns of the State Department over the growing evidence that Pyongyang was continuing to pursue a nuclear weapons capability in violation of its NPT commitments. As with the current Bush administration, the senior Bush's State Department sought Beijing's cooperation in pressing North Korea to live up to its commitments and avoid taking steps that could destabilize the Korean peninsula and the entire East Asia region.


The Baker-Cheney Cable

The November 18, 1991 cable from Secretary of State James Baker to Secretary of Defense (and now Vice President) Richard Cheney provides a fascinating inside view of U.S. diplomacy on North Korea, especially when one is aware of the larger framework of U.S. diplomacy that shaped Baker's comments, as well as the role played by policy-makers in the current Bush II administration. As Baker was returning from his Asian trip and Cheney was preparing to head to Korea for security consultations with Seoul, a number of diplomatic initiatives aimed at addressing the security situation on the Korean peninsula were in play. (Note 4) At the time, South and North Korea were engaged in delicate parallel negotiations aimed at agreements on reconciliation between the two countries and the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. U.S. policy was coming to give priority to denuclearization as a prerequisite to reconciliation, and in line with this goal, had put heavy pressure on South Korean President Roh Tae Woo, personally applied by then Undersecretary of Defense for Policy (and current Deputy Secretary of Defense) Paul Wolfowitz during the summer of 1991, to accept a joint ban with the North on nuclear reprocessing. Then, the decision by the Bush administration in October 1991 to withdraw its nuclear weapons from South Korea as part of a worldwide drawdown of U.S. tactical nuclear deployments was a key step towards denuclearizing the peninsula. For his part, President Roh wanted to take the lead in negotiations with the North, and was opposed to any U.S. direct contacts with Pyongyang, which Baker in this cable seemed open to considering, if only to clarify the U.S. position.

Other diplomatic currents involved Tokyo and Beijing. Seoul had been very unhappy with the free-lance diplomacy of the LDP's political dealmaker Shin Kanemaru, who had visited North Korea in September 1991 and discussed with Kim Il Sung normalization of ties between their two countries, an act the very possibility of which could upset Roh's complex diplomatic pas-de-deux with the North. (see Paragraph 4 of the cable). As the result of Seoul's pressure on the Japanese government, Kanemaru was brought back on the reservation and Tokyo's position was brought into line with that of South Korea and the U.S. (see Paragraph 7) If Seoul was concerned to keep Japan out of the diplomatic mix, Baker and the U.S. seemed to feel that Beijing had a more positive role to play, if done discretely (see Paragraph 8) This estimation (or over-estimation in the views of some) of Beijing's leverage on Pyongyang is echoed in current administration views on how to handle the recent North Korean nuclear crisis-in-waiting.

The final, and key in Baker's view, role was that of the U.S. As he noted to Cheney, Seoul had to realize that it could not bring North Korea to agreement on the denuclearization of the peninsula alone. [See paragraph 6] Other U.S. military moves in connection with its force levels in South Korea also needed to be choreographed so as to support U.S. diplomatic efforts in all these capitals. As Baker summed up the situation,

        The US remains key to orchestrating international pressures on their [i.e. South Korea's] behalf. In my mind, this also means that while we need to be sensitive to South Korea's concerns, they need to appreciate that our security commitments and interests give us a big say, too. [Paragraph 6]


